JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
President Obama approves the
largest single
release of Guantanamo Bay
prisoners yet, in
a push to close the
controversial detention
center.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Also ahead
this Tuesday:
The candidates take on the
battle against
ISIS.
We compare the strategies laid
out by Donald
Trump and Hillary Clinton to
defeat the terror
group.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Plus, the
struggle of early
child care workers to make a
living, and why
children are the ones losing out
in the end.
MARCY WHITEBOOK, University of
California,
Berkeley: The care and education
of young
children, before kindergarten,
is just as
complex as teaching children who
are older.
But we haven't restructured our
system, and
invested the public dollars that
it will take.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: The toll from
days of historic
flooding in Louisiana kept on
climbing today.
Local officials raised the
number of fatalities
to 10.
Early estimates indicate at
least 40,000 homes
have been impacted..
The water did start to slowly
recede in areas
near Baton Rouge.
Meanwhile, some residents
managed to return
to their homes to assess the
damage.
Governor John Bel Edwards
acknowledged recovery
efforts have been tough.
GOV.
JOHN BEL EDWARDS (D), Louisiana:
This is a
very difficult situation to get
response out
as quickly as we would like to.
We still have about 34,000
meters without
electricity.
That's customers, so those are
homes or businesses.
We understand that there is
still a lot of
people who are suffering.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The governor
also reported
about 8,000 people remain in
shelters, a number
he expects will rise.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In California,
crews have gained
ground on a massive wildfire
north of San
Francisco.
It's charred nearly seven square
miles, and
destroyed 175 homes and other
buildings.
But local officials said the
fire is now about
20 percent contained.
The progress came as authorities
arrested
a man they believe set the fire.
He was charged with 17 counts of
arson, and
is suspected of starting several
other fires
in the area.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The nation's
third largest
health insurer, Aetna, has
announced plans
to leave most of the health care
exchanges
set up under President Obama's
Affordable
Care Act.
It will sharply cut its
participation from
15 states to just four next
year, citing heavy
financial losses.
Aetna is the third major health
insurer to
pull out of the ACA in recent
months, joining
UnitedHealth and Humana.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Russia widened
its bombing
campaign in Syria today, this
time launching
airstrikes from Iran.
The warplanes took off from a
base near Hamedan
about 175 miles southwest of
Tehran.
They targeted Islamic State
fighters and other
militants.
It's the first time Russia has
used another
country's territory for attacks
in Syria.
An American military official
said the U.S.
was warned in advance.
COL.
CHRIS GARVER, Spokesman,
Operation Inherent
Resolve: They informed us they
were coming
through, and we ensured safety
of flight as
those bombers passed through the
area and
toward their target and then
when they passed
out again.
They didn't impact coalition
operations in
either Iraq or Syria during the
time.
We knew in time.
It's not a lot of time, but it's
enough.
And it was enough time to make
sure that we
could ensure safety of flight.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's believed to
be the first
time that Tehran has allowed a
foreign country
to use one of its bases for
military operations
since the 1979 Islamic
Revolution.
HARI SREENIVASAN: One of
Britain's most well-known
radical Muslim preachers has
been convicted
of rallying support for the
Islamic State.
Anjem Choudary was found guilty
in a London
court last month.
That was unreportable until now
due to criminal
proceedings.
His followers have been linked
to a number
of high-profile attacks,
including last year's
beheading of a British soldier
in London.
Choudary could face up to 10
years in prison.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Here in the U.S.,
regulators
today unveiled new
fuel-efficiency rules for
large trucks and other
heavy-duty vehicles.
The caps will cut greenhouse gas
emissions
by over one billion tons, and
save over $170
billion in fuel costs.
By 2027, heavy-duty trucks will
be 25 percent
more fuel-efficient than those
sold in 2018.
Heavy-duty vehicles account for
more than
20 percent of
transportation-related
pollution.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stocks slipped
on Wall Street
today, due in part to a lag in
phone and utility
company shares.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost 84 points
to close at 18552.
The Nasdaq fell nearly 35
points, and the
S&P 500 dropped 12.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A passing to
note: Renowned
TV host John McLaughlin has
died.
He was the creator, executive
producer and
host of "The McLaughlin Group,"
a long-running
weekly public affairs show.
McLaughlin was too ill to host
this past Sunday,
the first time he's missed a
taping in 34
years.
Besides his work in TV, he
served as a speechwriter
for Presidents Nixon and Ford.
John McLaughlin was 89 years
old.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And now some
highlights
from today's Summer Games in
Rio.
The U.S. women gymnasts ended an
exhilarating
Olympic run where they began it,
atop the
winners podium.
Simone Biles won her fourth gold
of the Games
in the floor exercise.
Her teammate Aly Raisman was at
her side,
taking the silver.
And in the men's finals,
American gymnast
Danell Leyva grabbed silvers on
both the parallel
bars and the high bar.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Still to come on
the "NewsHour":
the largest Guantanamo detainee
transfer under
President Obama; how Donald
Trump and Hillary
Clinton plan to defeat ISIS;
allegations against
FOX News' Roger Ailes spark a
larger discussion
on workplace harassment; and
much more.
FOX News' Roger Ailes spark a
larger discussion
on workplace harassment; and
much more.
When President Obama took
office, there were
242 detainees being held at the
Guantanamo
Bay prison.
He stated his priority was to
close the facility
in Cuba.
But finding places for the
inmates to go,
even after they had been legally
cleared,
has proven difficult.
Yesterday, the Pentagon
announced the latest
transfer out, 15 prisoners to go
to the United
Arab Emirates, meaning the
number left is
down to 61.
William Brangham has the story.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: On his first
day in office,
President Obama promised to
close Guantanamo.
He's called it expensive,
unnecessary and
a -- quote -- "recruitment
brochure for our
enemies."
While Congress has blocked the
transfer of
high-risk detainees to U.S.
prisons, the administration
has focused on moving those who
are cleared
for release to other nations.
But Monday's announcement, which
was the single
biggest transfer for this
administration,
has been criticized by
Republicans, who say
these 15 men are dangerous and
should never
have been let go.
I'm joined now by Charlie Savage
of The New
York Times.
He's covered Gitmo and the war
on terror for
many years.
Charlie, help us understand, who
are these
15 men that were just recently
released?
CHARLIE SAVAGE, The New York
Times: Hi.
Thanks for having me on.
So these men, these 15, none of
them are Emirate.
Twelve of them are from Yemen
and three of
them are from Afghanistan.
And they were approved for
transfer to a stable
country that could provide
various security
assurances some time ago in many
cases either
by a task force in 2009 or later
by a parole-like
review panel, in both cases made
up of six
security agencies, the Central
Intelligence
Agency, the Defense Department,
the State
Department, the Justice
Department, and so
on.
These are career officials, not
political
appointees.
And they unanimously agreed that
these men
no longer posed such a threat to
the United
States that it was necessary to
keep holding
them in indefinite detention
without trial.
But because they came from,
especially in
the case of the Yemenis,
countries that were
not stable, in fact, chaotic and
had a weak
central government, they were
stranded until
some other country that could
meet these security
assurances was willing to take
them in.
And in this very sizable
transfer, the UAE
solved that problem for the
United States
and brought them to its country,
and is now
putting them through a
rehabilitation program.
They have not been released on
to the streets.
They are still in custody, but
with an eye
towards eventually moving them
out towards
a halfway house and then life in
relative
freedom in that country under
monitoring.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Several
Republicans have
pointed out that these -- they
argue that
these 15 men are very dangerous
and they point
out that in a prior
classification, these
men were ruled as being very
high-risk.
So what has changed in their
status as far
as the U.S. government's view of
these men?
CHARLIE SAVAGE: Right.
Well, there are two things to
understand about
that.
One is that it has become a
politically potent
sort of partisan fodder to say
that any transfer
release from Guantanamo is
endangering national
security as a sort of way to
attack the Obama
administration.
And it polls well.
And no matter who is released
under what circumstances,
this is a recurring theme.
And so it has to be understood
as part of
this, the texture of these
policy debates.
Now, as to your question
specifically, what
they're referring to is, there
was a group
of reports or dossiers prepared
by the military
about everyone at Guantanamo in
the first
few years that they were there
under the Bush
administration that later became
public when
they were released by Private
Chelsea Manning
through WikiLeaks.
And they raised the threat level
of the detainees
and sort of described who the
military at
that point thought they were.
And almost everyone who was
there was rated
either a medium or a high risk.
And most of the men in this
group were also
rated a high risk.
That is a snapshot in time based
on the military's
understanding in the year 2004,
2005, 2006.
So what happens later, as years
continue to
pass, is that then the Obama
administration
came in and appointed that task
force I mentioned
earlier, and then later since
2013 that parole-like
review board with these six
agencies.
And so they come back and they
take another
look at these men and how have
they behaved
in custody.
What kind of trouble have they
gotten into
or do they comply with the
rules?
What have they said over the
years?
What are their family members
saying about
them?
What kind of situation would
they go into?
And now things are different, in
that we have
this very well-developed system,
some of it
imposed by Congress, over the
Obama administration's
objection, that requires
detainees to go to
a place where there are adequate
security
assurances of monitoring and
other steps to
reduce the chance of recidivism,
whereas,
in 2004, 2005, 2006, if someone
was released,
they really were just simply let
go.
And so what could be a threat,
what could
be perceived as a threat at the
time of those
reports may or may not still be
the case 10,
12 years later.
But that is the basis of the
attacks that
you're hearing in the political
sphere.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, we have 61
men who are
still at Guantanamo now.
What's likely to happen with
those men?
CHARLIE SAVAGE: So, 20 more of
them have also
been recommended for transfer if
security
conditions can be met in the
receiving countries.
And the Obama administration is
clearly trying
very hard to get that list down
to zero or
as close to zero as they can get
it before
President Obama leaves office.
And a few more names may be
added to it over
time by that parole-like review
board.
But there are still going to be
dozens of
men, currently 41, who are not
recommended
for transfer, either because
they're facing
charges before a military
commission, or more
likely because, by numbers, they
are simply
still deemed too dangerous to
release, but
untriable.
They will have to be housed
somewhere.
President Obama's plan to close
Gitmo wasn't
to let them go, but to bring
them to a different
prison on domestic soil.
Congress has forbidden him from
doing that.
And so most likely, come January
20, when
the next president takes office,
those men
at least will still be there.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Charlie Savage
of The New York Times, thank you
very much.
CHARLIE SAVAGE: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: One of the
most contentious
issues during the current
presidential election
is how to confront ISIS and who
was responsible
for the rise of the extremist
group.
Margaret Warner reports.
MARGARET WARNER: This was the
scene recently
in a village not far from Mosul
in Northern
Iraq.
Newly uploaded video purports to
show Islamic
State fighters doing battle with
Iraqi Kurdish
forces.
Despite battlefield setbacks in
Iraq and Syria,
the militant group remains
lethal.
How to fight ISIS has become a
central theme
in the 2016 U.S. presidential
race.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
ISIS is honoring President
Obama.
He is the founder of ISIS.
I would say the co-founder would
be crooked
Hillary Clinton.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
MARGARET WARNER: That was last
week.
Yesterday, Republican nominee
Donald Trump
delivered a fuller anti-ISIS
message in Youngstown,
Ohio.
DONALD TRUMP: My administration
will aggressively
pursue joint and coalition
military operations
to crush and destroy ISIS,
international cooperation
to cut off their funding,
expanded intelligence-sharing,
and cyber-warfare to disrupt and
disable a
their propaganda and recruiting.
MARGARET WARNER: He also
proclaimed that he
would end what he called an era
of nation-building,
and would take harsh steps to
stop ISIS from
penetrating the United States.
DONALD TRUMP: The time is
overdue to develop
a new screening test for the
threats we face
today.
I call it extreme vetting.
I call it extreme, extreme
vetting.
MARGARET WARNER: It would screen
out those
who sympathize with terror
groups and those
who have, in his words, any
hostile attitude
towards our country or its
principles.
DONALD TRUMP: Those who do not
believe in
our Constitution.
MARGARET WARNER: In a Web video
released last
night, Democrat Hillary
Clinton's campaign
tried to turn Trump's own words
against him,
saying he would fail the test
he'd set for
immigrants.
Last November, Clinton said she
would defeat
ISIS by massing more U.S. ground
troops against
the group, though with limits.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
And we should be honest about
the fact that,
to be successful, airstrikes
will have to
be combined with ground forces
actually taking
back more territory from ISIS.
Like President Obama, I do not
believe that
we should again have 100,000
American troops
in combat in the Middle East.
MARGARET WARNER: That fits with
the picture
of Clinton in a joint Washington
Post/ProPublica
report today about the early
Obama administration
debate over whether to fulfill
his campaign
pledge to pull out of Iraq
altogether.
It notes that Clinton was --
quote -- "one
of the most vocal advocates for
a muscular
U.S. presence in Iraq after the
withdrawal
deadline at the end of 2011."
Clinton lost that argument, and
all U.S. fighting
forces left.
It's also been widely reported
that, in 2013,
Clinton and then CIA Director
David Petraeus
proposed arming and training the
so-called
moderate rebels in neighboring
Syria, but
that the president rejected it.
Those U.S.-backed rebels are
still doing battle
against Syrian President Bashar
al-Assad,
but with mixed results, in the
brutal five-year
old civil war that continues to
this day.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Margaret Warner.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, what are
the differences
between how Donald Trump and
Hillary Clinton
would combat ISIS?
For that, we turn to Walid
Phares, a foreign
policy adviser to Donald Trump.
And Wendy Sherman, she was
undersecretary
of state for political affairs
while Hillary
Clinton was secretary of state.
She's now an outside adviser to
the Hillary
Clinton campaign.
Walid Phares, what's the key
strategic difference
that Donald Trump wants to make
in the fight
against ISIS that the Obama
administration
has not?
WALID PHARES, Donald Trump
Foreign Policy
Adviser: Well, first of all,
very important
to know that, between now and
2017, many things
will change on the ground, and
they will change
for either Mrs. Clinton or Mr.
Trump.
So, anything we're projecting
right now has
to do with the moment.
There are major differences.
First, in looking at the three
battlefields,
one is Iraq, Syria and, of
course, Libya has
to be dealt with.
Three levels are important in
terms of difference.
Level number one is who -- what
forces are
going to be engaging ISIS on the
ground?
Is it Kurdish forces, the Iraqi
army or others
in Syria?
And why do we ask this question?
Because we don't want to end up
with a sect
controlling another sect on the
ground, which
will found the next war.
Second is also, who would take
over after
liberation from ISIS?
Should it be the locals,
national, the government,
or a coalition of regional
forces that would
help them?
And, thirdly, of course, what is
the future
of civil wars such as in Syria?
Who will stay?
Who will go?
And I think we have tremendous
differences
in how to go in, how to manage
and, of course,
the negotiations for the future.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, Mr.
Phares, one of the
things that Donald Trump has
said in a debate
in March is that he's open to up
to 20,000
to 30,000 U.S. troops being on
the ground.
Is that necessary?
Is that the right course?
WALID PHARES: Mr. Trump made
that statement.
He may make other statements.
These are decisions that only
when Mr. Trump
is the president, hopefully,
with his national
security Cabinet, will decide
upon the time.
President Obama, for example,
didn't want
to send forces to the region
after the withdrawal
from Iraq.
He had engaged in a warfare
situation in Libya.
He is sending forces.
So, these are national security
decisions
that would be decided once there
is an evaluation
of the situation on the ground.
The American public in general
has no appetite
for sending tens of thousands,
but each situation
has a condition.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Ms. Sherman,
Secretary Clinton
has also called for ground
troops, but in
a limited capacity.
What do you see as the
differences between
what Mr. Trump is proposing and
what Mrs.
Clinton would carry out?
WENDY SHERMAN, Former U.S.
Undersecretary
of State for Political Affairs:
Well, first
of all, all of the things that
Walid just
outlined were not discussed in
Mr. Trump's
speech at all yesterday.
In fact, the strategy that Mr.
Trump put on
the table, other than the
extreme vetting,
is exactly what President Obama
and Secretary
Clinton have worked toward.
That is an international
coalition with local
troops on the ground, having a
very aggressive
strategy in the cyberworld to
stop the financial
flows.
All of these are part of a
multivector strategy
that has been under way under
President Obama
for quite some time now and is
actually having
success.
Just today, Secretary of Defense
Carter said
that Syrian democracy forces had
indeed taken
back Manbij, which is a very key
transit point,
and now opens the way to
ultimately getting
to Raqqa, which ISIL has said is
its centerpiece
for a caliphate, which is
disappearing on
the ground in Syria.
There is a very complex
environment in the
Middle East.
In that, Walid is correct.
But it can't come without some
knowledge and
some background.
And every day, we get a
different message
from Mr. Trump.
I would like to know, does he
still support
torture, which is not the
American way and
doesn't bring results?
Does he still believe that we
ought to be
killing innocent civilians if
there is a family
of terrorists that have nothing
to do with
the terror?
Is he someone who still believes
in, as you
pointed out, Hari, sending
thousands and thousands
of troops?
Mr. Trump has been on all sides
of that issue
over the history of the last
several years.
So it's very difficult to know
whether Mr.
Trump stands and whether he has
an understanding
of the complexity of the
situation and the
progress that's being made, but
the progress
that is still absolutely needed
to protect
our homeland and to make sure
that Americans
feel safe and secure.
HARI SREENIVASAN: One of the
things that she
said about extreme vetting, what
does that
mean?
We have heard that there might
be an ideological
questionnaire.
But if I'm a terrorist, wouldn't
I just lie?
WALID PHARES: The final goal of
this is to
interdict jihadists from coming
to the United
States.
Everything else could be
reconstructed.
He needs to have the input of
national security
agencies.
One of the problems with our
analysts and
our national security agencies
over the past
eight years have been
encountering is that
the ideological discourse that
the jihadists
have among themselves has been
removed, removed
from the analysts.
So it would be very difficult to
be preemptive
in the sense to understand when
there is radicalization.
This is something that our
liberal democratic
allies in France, in Britain and
also in other
countries and also in the Arab
world have
not done.
We have retreated from the
ideological element.
It's not that we are against one
or the other
ideology.
But we need some indicators that
these people
are Salafis, are Takfiri, are
jihadists, so
that we can vet them.
Extreme vetting is not a
physical extreme
vetting.
It's an intellectual exercise
that would bring
us back to where we should have
been, understanding
better the ideas that
radicalizes these jihadists.
HARI SREENIVASAN: One of the
things that Mr.
Trump also said yesterday was
that he was
-- the similarity that existed
between Orlando
and San Bernardino, the attacks,
were that
they were carried out by
children and grandchildren
of immigrants.
Is there a particular generation
where Americans
are patriotic enough where they
wouldn't be
-- fall under the spell of ISIS?
WALID PHARES: What he meant by
that was not
actually a sociological
interpretation of
how these communities would
work, because
we also have immigrants and sons
and daughters
of immigrants from the Arab and
Muslim war
who fought in our armed forces
and who died
for America.
What he meant by that is,
despite the fact
of integration, the French are
telling us
the same thing, the Germans are
the same thing.
So, integration is not the
answer.
It's basically deradicalization.
So, we want to make sure that
this ideology
doesn't go and thrust through
the generations
to a third one.
It would be the same case for a
neo-Nazi or
an anti-Semite or a Bolshevik.
It's not about a social problem.
It's about an intellectual,
ideological problem.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Wendy Sherman,
one of the
distinctions that I think exists
between Hillary
Clinton and President Obama is
the institution
of a no-fly zone over Syria.
President Obama, even as recent
as the G20,
said that that would be
counterproductive.
What would a President Clinton
do in that
case to make it work?
WENDY SHERMAN: First of all,
Hari, in answer
to your question about what
extreme vetting
is, quite frankly, I didn't
understand Walid's
answer.
This is not an intellectual
exercise.
This is about our immigration
policies.
And they are very strict, and
the vetting
is very tough.
And our authorities are always
looking at
ways to make sure that we are as
clear as
we possibly can be.
As Walid himself knows -- he's
not a Muslim,
but he came here himself in
1990, when he
no longer felt personally safe
in Lebanon
because of his own history,
which we could
discuss at another time.
So, I don't quite understand yet
what extreme
vetting means, other than a nice
sound bite
on television.
To your point about a no-fly
zone, Secretary
Clinton has said that she wants
to explore
whatever alternative may deal
with the really
tragic humanitarian disaster
which has played
out in Syria.
You know that there are
literally millions
of people who are now refugees.
There are millions of people who
are internally
displaced.
The leader of Syria, Bashar
al-Assad, has
used starvation as a weapon of
war, has used
chemical weapons against his own
people, has
used chlorine gas probably
against his own
people.
And so the question is, in fact,
how do we
create some humanitarian safety
for all of
these millions of people who are
really in
a desperate, desperate
situation?
We have put enormous pressure on
Turkey, on
Jordan, on Iraq, and now on
Europe, as migrants
and refugees pour out of Syria
looking for
safety.
So, I applaud Secretary Clinton
in wanting
to explore every alternative,
even knowing
some of these are quite tough to
do.
And she will look very carefully
to see what
is doable.
But we can't not try to see if
there is an
answer to this humanitarian
tragedy.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Wendy Sherman,
Walid Phares, thank you both.
WALID PHARES: Thank you.
WENDY SHERMAN: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
child care workers
struggle to make ends meet on
near minimum
wage; a new book explores the
history of poor
white Americans; and inside the
extraordinary
nose of a search-and-rescue dog.
But, first, an update on the
fallout at FOX
News over allegations that its
co-founder,
Roger Ailes, sexually harassed
women employees
for years.
Ailes resigned in late July with
a reported
$40 million severance package,
that after
a lawsuit by former FOX anchor
Gretchen Carlson
alleged that her show was
canceled because
she'd rebuffed sexual advances
from Ailes.
In the following weeks, a
growing number of
women, including prime-time
anchor Megyn Kelly,
reportedly came forward with
similar stories
of impropriety.
Ailes has called Ms. Carlson's
accusations
false.
And an internal investigation by
FOX's parent
company is still under way.
For a closer look, not only at
this case,
but at the wider matter of
sexual harassment
in the workplace, we turn to
Sarah Ellison,
a contributing editor at "Vanity
Fair."
She recently reported on the
Ailes allegations.
And Shelley Ross, she's a former
network television
news executive, best known for
her 17-year
tenure at ABC News.
She recently wrote about her own
professional
experiences with Roger Ailes,
and the news
business at large, in The Daily
Beast.
And we welcome both of you to
the program.
And we should note at the
outset, Roger Ailes
back in the news today because
of a New York
Times report that he's now
advising Donald
Trump's campaign.
And we should say the campaign
denies that.
But, Sarah Ellison, I want to
turn to you
first.
What is the state of what is
known about Roger
Ailes' alleged harassment of
women at FOX
News?
SARAH ELLISON, "Vanity Fair":
Well, we know
-- largely, what we know is what
we have learned
from our reporting, which is
that the internal
investigation that is ongoing
that you referred
to earlier has identified at
least women in
the double digits who have come
forward and
spoken to the internal
investigation.
And we know that it was
something that implicated
Ailes certainly.
There are people who have come
out and told
their stories, but there are
people who have
not yet come forward, and I
think that we're
going to see more women, even
more women come
forward in the coming days.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, we should
say that he's
denied any wrongdoing.
SARAH ELLISON: That's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: He did reportedly
receive this
$40 million settlement when he
left FOX.
Does that mean he's legally free
and clear,
whatever is discovered?
SARAH ELLISON: Well, no, I don't
know that
any kind of a contractual
arrangement could
actually put someone legally
free and clear
from any kind of behavior.
I mean, one of the things that
we know and
that I reported last week was
that there are
-- in the course of this --
these discussions
that have been going on with the
internal
investigation and also with the
women who
initially brought a lawsuit
against Roger
Ailes, Gretchen Carlson, is that
there have
been some settlement discussions
that have
begun.
And at issue in the settlement
discussions
are tapes that multiple women,
including Gretchen
Carlson, have made of their
interactions with
Roger Ailes.
And the fact that those are now
circulating,
at least among the people who
are discussing
this possible settlement, just
makes every
bit of this a bit more
explosive.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Sarah
Ellison, one more.
Is there then the potential for
more legal
action against Roger Ailes?
SARAH ELLISON: Well, what we
have seen in
the press, we -- again, he
denies any kind
of wrongdoing.
But there are -- beyond sexual
harassment
charges, there are sort of
intimidation and
bullying and leaking stories
about people.
It's not clear to me if he was
using the company
money to settle multiple
lawsuits against
multiple women and not
disclosing that.
I don't know at what point that
reaches the
level that corporate governance
experts or
FEC people would be interested
in, or at what
point any of this becomes
actually criminal.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And which is a
question we
can't know the answer to at this
point.
Shelley Ross, let me turn to you
now.
You did write that you have
known Roger Ailes
for -- since the beginning of
your career,
practically.
You wrote of meeting him over
lunch.
He made -- proposed what you
described as
a sexual alliance as you were
going to work
for him.
Your lawyer contacted his
lawyers.
He then apologized.
You did work with him.
You have since stayed in touch
with him over
the years.
But you go on to say -- in this
article you
wrote in The Daily Beast, you
said, "Sexual
harassment in network television
is pervasive."
How pervasive is it?
SHELLEY ROSS, Former Network
News Executive:
It's everywhere.
It's everywhere I worked.
And it has many levels, many
faces.
Being thrown into a swimming
pool on a company
picnic is sexual harassment.
It's an act of hostility.
I was the one at ABC, I was the
producer doing
the very first stories on sexual
harassment
around the time of Anita Hill's
testimony
against Clarence Thomas.
And my boss presented me with a
birthday cake
with a phallus on it.
It's a hostile environment.
I know executive producers who
turn to their
young girls on their staff, and,
"I haven't
had my morning hug."
I was once -- as I was leaving
ABC, I had
a correspondent grab me and grab
my behind
and said to me, "I can do this
now that you're
no longer my boss."
And I stepped back and said,
"No, you can't."
It's pretty ugly.
It's -- the reason I wrote this
piece in The
Daily Beast is that we have got
to stop, we
have got the end harassment now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Shelley Ross, let
me just stop
you there.
Do you think it's worse in the
news business
than it is across the board for
women?
SHELLEY ROSS: No, I don't think
it's any different.
It's just you think, since we
report on it,
that our colleagues should know
better, that
they should be a little more
elevated.
And they're not.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And do you -- no,
go ahead.
What were you going to say?
SHELLEY ROSS: It's men and
women.
I have had a lot of men and
former male colleagues
reach out to me since I wrote
The Daily Beast
article to tell me things have
happened to
them years ago.
And they sound as scarred as
women in the
workplace.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you do go on,
Shelley Ross,
to write about what you think
needs to be
done, that there just needs to
be more candor.
Explain what you're talking
about.
SHELLEY ROSS: Well, I think,
even at FOX -- I
think FOX has the opportunity --
now that
Bill Shine, who was Roger Ailes'
number two,
has become president, I think --
everybody
thinks he's a really good guy
and he's very
popular.
But he has an opportunity to
become a hero.
He could say, I want FOX News to
become the
safest place in the world for
men and women.
I think there has to be public
airings.
What usually happens, which
happened at FOX
for 20 years, is a woman is
sexually harassed.
Where do they go?
They go to human resources.
Human resources is working for
the corporation.
They don't want a lawsuit.
So, there is a settlement.
There's hush money paid.
And there's a nondisclosure.
So, everything is swept under
the carpet.
And it goes on and on and on.
And I say we need something akin
to the Truth
and Reconciliation hearings
after apartheid
in 1974.
Nelson...
JUDY WOODRUFF: In South Africa?
SHELLEY ROSS: Yes.
Nelson Mandela had a great idea
to say, come
forward, clear the air, without
any retribution,
and we can all move forward
safely.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me turn
to Sarah
Ellison.
Having written as much as you
have about what
happened at FOX, and I know
you're familiar
with other news organizations,
whether it's
something exactly like what
Shelley Ross describes
or something akin to that, what
do you see
as a real potential solution
here, or is there
one?
SARAH ELLISON: Well, I mean, I
can tell you
what is happening at FOX News,
and -- with
the internal investigation that
is ongoing.
And that is that someone very
close to that
said to me, this is not a
therapy session
for the women involved.
This is a law firm that has been
hired to
give legal advice to 21st
Century Fox.
So, I don't want to -- I think
that what Shelley
is proposing is quite
interesting.
And there has been some lip
service paid to
the notion that they want to
create a very
safe place to work, but it's --
you look at
how pervasive this is in
something like television,
and where people are invited to
comment in
the newsroom on how someone
looks on air,
and people are constantly
talking about appearance
and weight and hair and makeup.
I mean, I think it's a very
difficult environment.
I can tell you only what I'm
seeing unfold
so far, and it's not that
promising.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we -- this
is a subject
that's much, much bigger than
what we have
time for tonight.
But we thank both of you for
certainly giving
us something to think about.
SARAH ELLISON: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Shelley Ross and
Sarah Ellison,
we thank you.
SHELLEY ROSS: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now a look at
how pre-K
teachers and early child care
workers struggle
to make ends meet, earning
little better than
subsistence wages, even as
parents and the
Obama administration say they
increasingly
value what they do.
It's part of our weekly
education series Making
the Grade, produced this week in
collaboration
with The Hechinger Report.
CHANEE WILSON, Teacher,
Salvation Army Booth
Memorial Child Development
Center: OK.
What color is this?
CHILDREN: Yellow.
CHANEE WILSON: Yellow and white.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Chanee Wilson
teaches at
the Salvation Army's Child
Development Center
in Oakland, California.
This year, the center received a
top quality
rating from the state.
CHERYL MURRAY, Program Director,
Salvation
Army Booth Memorial Child
Development Center:
Our teachers are doing a really
good job.
They're not just baby-sitting.
They're actually teaching.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But program
director Cheryl
Murray says, despite the high
rating, she
is not able to pay her teachers
a livable
wage.
CHERYL MURRAY: We're unable.
If we pay them more, then we
wouldn't be able
to serve the families, and the
families really
need the service.
I wish I could hit the lottery
and pay more
for them.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The center
serves low-income
families and gets 80 percent of
its funding
from state subsidies.
Families pay on a sliding scale
based on their
income, and teachers are paid
minimum wage
or slightly higher.
One issue is staffing.
Because they have younger
children, child
care classes require more
teachers than kindergarten.
Chanee Wilson lives in Section 8
subsidized
housing with her two children
and receives
a small amount of money in food
stamps.
She makes $13.25 an hour.
CHANEE WILSON: It's a struggle
every month
paycheck to paycheck.
You have kids and you have
bills.
We more focus on the needs,
which is like
providing the roof over their
heads, the clothes,
then the food, and things like
that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Her problem is
a common
one.
Labor experts say child care
workers all over
the country fail to earn a
livable wage.
MARCY WHITEBOOK, University of
California,
Berkeley: Early childhood jobs
are amongst
the lowest jobs across any
occupation.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Marcy
Whitebook is the director
of the Center for the Study of
Child Care
Employment at the University of
California,
Berkeley.
MARCY WHITEBOOK: Forty-six
percent of child
care workers are relying on some
type of federal
income support.
The wages are so low that
somebody working
full-time isn't making a living
wage, and
what that means is that in order
to meet the
needs of their families, they
need to get
assistance.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Wilson has her
associate's
degree in early childhood
education and is
attending weekend and night
classes to earn
her bachelor's degree.
But even with a bachelor's
degree, Wilson's
salary will still hover around
the minimum
wage, like lead teacher Laronda
Rainey (ph),
who earns $12.55 an hour.
To make ends meet, Rainey, who
has a bachelor's
degree, works as a security
guard at night.
CHERYL MURRAY: I think most of
our teachers
here really teach from the
heart, because,
if their heart is not in it,
they wouldn't
be here, because of the wages.
MARCY WHITEBOOK: College
graduates who majored
in early childhood have the
distinction of
having the lowest lifetime
earnings compared
to any other degree.
That's hardly a recruitment and
retention
strategy.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In fact,
Whitebook says
fewer and fewer colleges offer
early education
degrees because students say
they can't make
a living with them.
At Blue Skies for Children,
another high-quality
preschool in Oakland,
co-director Claire Bainer
can't find the skilled teachers
the program
strives to recruit.
CLAIRE BAINER, Co-Director, Blue
Skies for
Children: It's very difficult.
This year, especially with the
economy up,
people can get jobs, even with
our high minimum
wage, flipping burgers, and
working the parking
lot attendants and things like
that pay the
same, and much easier work.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Teachers here
are paid more,
but Bainer says, on top of a
bachelor's degree,
she wants them to have extensive
training
in early education, and be good
critical thinkers.
CLAIRE BAINER: Children are
learning to talk
and learning to negotiate.
So, it's very important to have
an articulate,
smart teacher who knows how to
help the children
develop those skills.
HARI SREENIVASAN: As a result,
the school,
which operates on parent fees
and fund-raising,
will increase their tuition this
fall.
CLAIRE BAINER: We can't hire
anybody at the
amount that we're paying the
teachers, so
we have to do a fee increase.
That only translates to parents
paying more.
Poor parents.
It's terrible.
It's a lot of money.
HARI SREENIVASAN: A recent study
by the Economic
Policy Institute reported infant
care in 33
states costs more than in-state
college tuition
and care for 4-year-olds exceeds
in 24 states.
At the same time, early
educators say preschool
is increasingly valued, and
point to new science
about critical brain development
occurring
well before kindergarten.
MARCY WHITEBOOK: The care and
education of
young children before
kindergarten is just
as complex as teaching children
who are older.
But we haven't restructured our
system and
invested the public dollars that
it will take.
HARI SREENIVASAN: For her part,
program director
Cheryl Murray wants her staff to
be compensated
equal to what public school
teachers earn.
CHERYL MURRAY: I believe they
should be paid
as well as secondary teachers.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Even some
conservative think
tanks are exploring the idea of
expanding
public funds for early
education.
Katharine Stevens heads the
American Enterprise
Institute's newly launched
early-childhood
program.
KATHARINE STEVENS, American
Enterprise Institute:
If we approach this in a smart,
efficient
way, what we will be able to
accomplish is
getting the neediest kids off to
a good start.
If kids are arriving in
kindergarten better
prepared, ultimately, our K-12
system will
cost less.
We will be reducing special ed
costs.
We will be reducing grade
retention costs.
However, throwing money at this
problem is
not going to assure us of that
kind of result.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stevens
cautions that new
pre-K programs shouldn't repeat
the mistakes
of schooling for older children.
KATHARINE STEVENS: It would be a
really big
mistake to scale up huge new
public spending
programs without any idea about
whether or
not those are going to be
effective, because
it's going to be very difficult
to roll that
back.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Recently, the
Obama administration
proposed investing $82 billion
to expand child
care to working families and
help providers
hire, train, and retain a highly
qualified
work force.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: a look at
the history
of poor white Americans.
That's the focus of the latest
addition to
the "NewsHour" Bookshelf.
Here's Jeffrey Brown.
JEFFREY BROWN: "This book tells
many stories.
Arguably, the most important is
the one we
as a people have trouble
embracing, the pervasiveness
of a class hierarchy in the
United States."
That line comes from a new book
with the provocative
title "White Trash," which makes
a provocative
argument that, from the nation's
earliest
history to now, ideals such as
opportunity
and upward mobility haven't
characterized
the lives of many Americans.
Author Nancy Isenberg is a
professor of history
at Louisiana State University.
And welcome to you.
NANCY ISENBERG, Author, "White
Trash: The
400-Year Untold History of Class
in America":
Well, thanks for having me.
JEFFREY BROWN: I think what hit
me most is
the idea that the poor have not
only been
accepted, but expected, that
it's a part of
our national DNA.
That's the argument you're
making?
NANCY ISENBERG: Well, I think
one of the things
we forget is that, for half of
our history,
we were an agrarian nation.
So, white trash really comes out
of notions
of rural poverty.
And it goes all the way back to
British ideas,
because, in the colonial period
and well throughout
the 19th century, the mark of
being a successful
American was being a property
owner.
And what we have forgotten is
that large numbers
of Americans didn't own
property.
For example, in Thomas
Jefferson's Virginia
at the time of the revolution,
40 percent
of white men were landless.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, when you
refer to white
trash, I just want to be clear.
And the idea of white trash,
literally, the
term was used, the terms like
waste.
Who do you mean?
NANCY ISENBERG: Yes, the word
white trash,
at least as far as we have been
able to discover,
first appeared in newspaper
print in the 1820s.
But it has a much older meaning,
because,
if we go back to some of the
leading promoters
of British colonization, when
they imagined
what were they going to do with
the new world,
the new world, first of all, was
imagined
as a wilderness, what they
called a wasteland.
And it was the perfect place for
literally
dumping the idle poor.
And these were referred to as
waste people.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, those are the
beginnings,
but your argument is that that
has pervaded
up to our own time, that we have
the national
myth of opportunity and social
mobility.
Are you saying that those don't
exist for
everyone, or that they don't
exist for one
subset of people?
NANCY ISENBERG: No, I think
there is clearly
-- you can find examples of
people who have
been able to rise up and improve
themselves.
The problem is that we
exaggerate the idea
that, at the time of the
revolution, we abandoned
the class system, we created an
exceptional
society, where we celebrated
upward mobility.
But, in fact, what the founders
like Franklin
and Jefferson really believed in
is similar
to what the British had in mind,
that the
poor would be allowed to move
into the frontier,
what was known as the southern
backcountry
and the old Northwest, and what
they were
really promising was horizon
mobility, not
upward mobility.
JEFFREY BROWN: And land then, as
you say,
was the key factor, not
education, not energy
or earning.
But what about now?
NANCY ISENBERG: I would say that
land is still
extremely important.
Class has a geography.
If we think about the way most
Americans live
-- and the other measure of
class that I highlight
is homeownership.
If you're poor, the same way
they have different
names for the poor, they have
different names
for what they live in, a shack,
a shebang,
or if we talk about trailer
trash.
What we live in today, we live
in class-zoned
neighborhoods.
We have taken into account the
importance
of racial segregation, and we
know that history,
but we also live in
neighborhoods that are
divided by class.
And if you live in a better
neighborhood,
you have more amenities, you
have better infrastructure,
better schools.
And so geography still plays a
very important
part, and land -- owning a house
is a very
important measure of being a
member of the
middle class.
JEFFREY BROWN: I know you wrote
the book before
we got into the politics of the
current campaign,
but how do you see class driving
our politics
today?
NANCY ISENBERG: I don't see
Donald Trump and
the issues brought up by Bernie
Sanders as
that surprising, because at
crucial moments
when politicians are involved,
they do use
class language.
They do heighten and emphasize
class distinctions.
So, that gets pulled -- we get
pulled in two
directions there, too, because,
sometimes,
politicians like to say, we are
all in the
middle class, or we all have
ambition to be
in the middle class, or we're
all capable
of being in the middle class.
That's when they want to sort of
draw from
the more positive script.
But, at other times, I talk
about key politicians
who use class as a way to
mobilize political
divisions or to accentuate
political divisions
in our country.
JEFFREY BROWN: Let me ask you
briefly, if
you could, does anything at all
that you have
studied through history give you
any hope
that there's -- that we could
lessen these
kind of class divisions in the
country?
NANCY ISENBERG: Our history
forces us to confront
things that at times we don't
want to deal
with.
We would prefer to have the
myth.
But I actually think it's
healthy if we can
get to the point where we can
talk about class,
not just use it as a slogan, not
just use
it as political rhetoric, but
actually to
think about it more deeply and
to think about
how it affects who we are.
And I often like to refer to the
musical "My
Fair Lady."
We judge people by the way
they're dressed,
by the way they talk, by the
unwritten codes
of class behavior.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, the
book is "White
Trash: The 400-Year Untold
History of Class
in America":
Nancy Isenberg, thank you very
much.
NANCY ISENBERG: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We all know
that a dog can
detect smells far better than
humans can,
but do you know why?
Our science producer Nsikan
Akpan has the
answer in the latest edition of
"ScienceScope."
NSIKAN AKPAN: Meet Zinca, the
rescue dog.
Dogs are relentless smellers.
Their noses can catch a scent
from a mile
away, five times farther than we
are.
These pooches can follow a smell
for hundreds
of miles, which allows them to
save lost people
or catch bad guys.
There are millions of reasons
why the canine
sense of smell is better than
ours.
And we're going to tackle all of
them in the
next three minutes.
Ready, set, sniff.
Let's start by hopping inside a
dog's nose.
Whee.
One key to a canine's super
snout is its long
and intricate nasal cavity.
LUCIA JACOBS, University of
California, Berkeley:
It's like a little cathedral
inside your nose
full of these bones.
NSIKAN AKPAN: Allow me to
introduce Lucia
Jacobs.
She's a neuroscientist at the
University of
California at Berkeley.
And she's absolutely obsessed
with how dog
noses work.
LUCIA JACOBS: There's all these
intricate
bony plates that they're all --
they're bending
what's called turbinates, which
control how
air moves through the nose.
NSIKAN AKPAN: Turbinates create
a labyrinth
of folds and corridors that
filter odors towards
different parts of a dog's nose,
T-bone steak
lands here.
A neighbor's cat lands there.
At the same time, dog seem to
smell in stereo.
Their two nostrils sniff at
different rates.
So they can tell whether or not
your gym socks
are to the left or to the right.
This leads to some pretty funky
behavior,
like circling.
LUCIA JACOBS: Olfactory
navigators circle
when they lose -- they have got
the scent,
but they don't know, is it going
off in a
different direction?
NSIKAN AKPAN: In our last
episode of "ScienceScope,"
we showed you how an odor isn't
a uniform
cloud.
Its shape is scraggly and wild,
and its portions
are stretched like taffy.
Sitting inside an odor plume
doesn't tell
you much.
You're surrounded by a jumbled
mess.
But traveling along the edge of
an odor gives
you context and direction.
That's why dogs circle.
They're looking for the edge.
LUCIA JACOBS: And so what they
do is, they
do a circle to pick up, where is
it strongest?
And then they will start
exploring in that
direction.
NSIKAN AKPAN: Remember those
millions of reasons
I promised?
A dog has 300 million smell
sensors, which
are also known as olfactory
receptors, inside
of it nose.
Humans only have five million.
Wah-wah.
Many think dogs are great
sniffers because
of all of those smell sensors,
but Jacobs
disagrees.
Her theory is, the strength of
an animal's
sense of smell depends on the
size of its
habitat.
Her idea starts with the
olfactory bulb, a
relay station just above the
nose that sends
smell information deeper into
the brain.
LUCIA JACOBS: In carnivores,
like wolves and
coyotes and foxes, and if you
look at the
size of their home range, the
olfactory bulb
scales with the size of their
home range.
NSIKAN AKPAN: They modern human,
in contrast,
relies on smells for short
distances, which
may explain why human olfactory
systems are
smaller.
Hey, do you smell that?
Smells like cookies in the break
room.
I will be right back.
Oh, man.
Oh, where were we?
So, but Jacobs believes, deep
down, all animals
react to smells the same way.
Her lab is testing this theory
in a cornucopia
of species, dogs, human, hermit
crabs, two
types of cockroaches, and the
leopard slug.
LUCIA JACOBS: They all move in
the same way.
They all track odors in the same
way.
So, we think there's got to be a
common algorithm
that they're all using.
NSIKAN AKPAN: Jacobs is part of
a nationwide
team trying to code those smell
algorithms
into robots.
That's all for now.
I'm Nsikan Akpan, and this is
"ScienceScope"
from the "PBS NewsHour."
HARI SREENIVASAN: Didn't know
there were science
-- nose algorithms or smell
algorithms, what
he was talking about.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: I'm never going
to look at
a dog's nose the same way.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You can watch
our first
"ScienceScope" episode online on
our Science
page at PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also on the
"NewsHour" online
right now: what's it like to
swim next to
Michael Phelps.
One columnist remembers the
record-smashing
Olympian as a 12-year-old
athlete, still years
away from fame, but already
showing signs
of greatness.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And a quick
correction before
we go tonight.
Earlier in the news summary, we
said followers
of Anjem Choudary, one of
Britain's most high-profile
radical Muslim preachers, were
linked to last
year's beheading of a British
soldier.
That incident actually happened
back in 2013.
We apologize for the error.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Wednesday, Miles O'Brien
takes us to the
edge of the most studied volcano
in the world.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.